5/8/23 - Giulliano Galdi

River flows have a minimum level, if they aren't there irrigation is shut off. 
Alfalfa is rotated with a small grain (oats, barley, wheat). But it's grown for forage. 
Most producers do a top-dressing, maybe an at-planting application of N for their small grains.
50-100 lb N/ac, the alfalfa reduction credit may not be appropriate here. 

The source of water is definitely a mix of ground and surface. 
Ground wells range from 10-100 feet, and vary across the season. 
Historically this area was flood irrigated. Now he's unsure, maybe mostly wheel line, some center pivot. 
Water application efficiency (how much goes to soil/plant) is typically low for wheel line (60-70%), 
but could be higher with good management. 
Several flavors of irrigation can help. 
MESA (mid elevation sprinkler application) uses high pressure to get even coverage, 80-90%
LESA uses less power
LEPA - best! A hose dragging on the ground, very low pressure, 95-98% efficiency
Remember these cause the 'irrigation dilemma', aquifer is not being recharged
Center pivots are usually electric?

Stand life could be longer than 6 years, but probably not shorter
Some do put insecticides/fertilizer in their irrigation water. Saves wheel traffic/soil compaction. 
He says if you have an electric center pivot and put the pesticides in the water, you save a lot of energy!

Partial irrigation is possible after establishment, could shut off for 3rd cutting. 
Need to look at book to figure out what that yield hit would look like (Intermountain alfalfa management)


Ask irrigation company:
Pump/pressure requirements for wheel lines/center pivots. 


Diesel vs gasoline vs electric
Look for company near Tulelake

Called Tulelake irrigation district 530-667-2249, useless
Called Alsco, Inc Red Bluff CA 530-527-4001,talked to Russ Harman (super nice guy!)
Argi Valley Irrigation 559-486-1412, located in Fresno (Mike?)
ap@agrivalley.com - they'll call me back?

Called Landmark Irrigation 559-665-3700, said they'd call me back? 

Russ Harman at Alsco, super nice guy, humble, farmer-------------

50 psi is a good assumption for a pump
That will get it out of the river, might be 70 psi if you are up on a hill
The 50 psi will also get it into your wheel line/center pivot, although center pivot only needs like 40 psi
Russ talked about pumping out of the shasta river

Problem with electric is that you get charged for peak use between 4-9pm. 
The premium is only 3-4 cents/kwh right now, so it's not worth the trouble of turning it off
Most alfalfa folks need to irrigate 24/7
In Siskiyou, folks are using 400-600 foot wells

Converting from an orchard back to alfalfa (Russ is doing that will his walnuts AND almonds)
has the advantage of the 'solid set irrigation', which is a sprinkler (?)
It's already there so he can use it on his alfalfa. Advantage? Not sure. Should call back. 
He said alfalfa prices are great. It costs him $0.65/lb to produce almonds, sold them for $0.09/lb
A 'gun cart'? Uses 120-130 psi. 

Mike at Agri Valley, super nice guy, snarky-------------

He thinks hybrid tractors are the future. No one in their right mind would do 100% electric tractor. 
In Tulare, everyone uses flood from the canal, no pumps involved
Some switching to sub-surface, which uses plastic and a pump at 20 psi
Switching to a variable frequency drive pump could increase the efficiency here
The energy sources are a mix between electric and diesel
SWEEP program has worked but only on fields close to a road (for access)
PG&E/SoCal Edison are not well liked
Propane is another option to get away from paying for diesel
Wells are 300-1500 feet, gets deeper as you move West to I-5
Folks pay ~$4/ac-ft from the canal. Pumping it might double that cost. Buying supplemental can be $1,800!!
Imperial gets a lot of water alotment, usually 10 ac-ft. So they don't care. 
He thinks if anything folks would replace some alfalfa with corn silage. 
Dairies are a huge market that is not going away. Folks get $150-300/ton. 

Russell Spain at Landmark Irrigation, Madera---------------------
559-479-2648
Total salesman for drip
He says drip irrigation can extend the life of alfalfa fields to 7-8 years, whereas flood is 3-4
He was real focused on the horsepower of the pump. 
Drip uses 40-50 psi. Need 60 psi for the sprinklers, and he says they don't use a filter. 
Electic won't work for 'travelling sprinklers'. 
He says drip often uses electric pumps, says 80% of drip installations use electric (he's a drip salesman)
Propane/NG is a thing, but isn't common. 
Hard no to electric tractors. Not even hybrid. 'They drive 24/7 during the year, no time to re-charge!'

RDO Water in Brawley CA (Imperial County, near Salton Sea!)------------------------
760 344-8000
Herarldo (Jerry for the gringos)
Both sprinklers and drip need the water to go through a filter first. 
Sprinlers use a 40-60 psi pump, go through a filter, then into a sprinkler w/pretty unregulated pressure
The sprinklers need 35-60 psi to work properly. Putting in a check valve that activates sprinkler only
when sufficient psi is available saves a lot of water. 
He says flood vs sprinkler/drip is 50/50 where he is. 
When you install drip, you get to automate a lot of things, and those use solar poewr. 
Majority of irrigation is diesel powered. Booster pumps, those are all diesel. Not going to change to electric. 
Booster pumps are used for sprinkler irrigation. 
Suction hose -> fitler -> booster pump -> filter (?) -> field
Sprinklers are a mix btwn mobile and permanent infrastructure. Permanent could possibly change to electic. 
Plastic pipes are smoother compared to aluminum so require less pressure. But it's piddly. 
When doing sprinkler/drip you can use fertigation. 
He says they fly on fertilizer. I'm ont sure about that. 

